Hello everyone.
Welcome back to exploring quantum physics.
I'm Charles Clark.
And this lecture is going
to discuss the theory and
applications of angular momentum.
Very important concept in quantum physics,
and one that in some sense
defines a larger framework within
which we look at many problems.
You might say, everything revolves
around angular momentum, joke, get it?
But it is in fact a very
important framework, and
I'll just draw your attention to random
example from the additional materials
section under the title,
Atomic clocks and quantum computers.
This is a figure from a paper
written by David Wineland,
who won the Nobel Prize
in Physics last year.
And it's a visionary paper that describes
the relationship between atomic clocks and
quantum computers and
actually provided a roadmap for
the development of the first practical
quantum computing device, as I see it,
which was this optical clock
based on the aluminium ion.
Now, what you see here is
a schematic of two atomic
energy level structures, and they're given
a number of these very precise labels.
It's only like five halves, it's not
like 2.6, it's exactly five halves.
So there are these various
quantum numbers, and
I don't expect you to necessarily
recognize these right now.
But these all are developed
on the basis understanding of
the conservation of angular momentum in
quantum systems and its quantization.
And this is extremely important,
it underpins everything,
atomic clocks, the operation of magnets
at a fundamental level, and so on.
So in this lecture,
we're going to go through some of
the fundamental techniques that
are required to develop and
use the theory of angular momentum and
quantum mechanics.
So, in particular, we're going to derive
a number of foundational properties of
angular momentum operators.
And I'm going to introduce
something that is pretty standard
set of procedures for tensor calculus.
They're very useful in developing
a practical understanding of how you
deal with angular momentum algebra.
And so,
some of you may be familiar with these.
In that case,
the first few parts of this lecture
might be sort of a review or tutorial.
Using approach was first
developed by Albert Einstein, and
it seems at first like just sort
of a notational innovation, but
it has a lot of important
practical consequences.
And this is useful in
many areas of physics.
Now for the sake of simplicity,
we're going to use vector notation, but
all the symbols denote operators.
So in other words, the angular momentum
in classical mechanics is this object.
And we saw its significance in
the context of the classical theory,
the hydrogen atom earlier.
So now we're treating it as, well,
let's say, a vector valued operator,
so it has three components, right?
Lz = xPy- yPx, and
then there's an Ly and
an Lx as well.
But these are now to be interpreted in
terms of the quantum mechanical operators.
So, I'm going to switch notation
because as it turns out,
it's much easier to do calculations
when you don't have different
symbols for coordinates, but
you just have a different subscript.
So hereafter, we're going to use
a convention x1, x2, and x3 for
the coordinates and then for the unit
vectors e1, e2, and e3, but occasionally,
when they lapse and switch back.
Okay, so now, the first thing
that you should take a note of,
this is going to become
important in the derivations,
is to use the Einstein summation
convention for repeated indices.
This is something that was actually
first pointed out by Einstein.
And he said, well, he noticed there
were lots of expressions of this type.
Here's the scalar product of two vectors,
a and b, which in our new notation,
we would write these as sum of ai bi.
And what Einstein noted
is that you can just,
in cases like that,
you can just cross out the summation sign.
And so,
whenever you encounter an expression
of this type, you implicitly,
Sum over a repeated index.
That saves the presence of having
large numbers of summations signs.
Now you do have to be
careful when you do this, but
that's why we're going to
engage in some practice.
Another tool,
That's the third of these tools.
Really useful is the Levi-Civita symbol.
So this has three subscripts,
and it takes the values,
+1, -1, or 0, according to whether in
the first instance,
if the symbols ijk are a cyclic or
even permutation of the symbols, 123.
So you can see, okay, 123,
if you shift that back
with a revolving
displacement of the index,
it goes to 231, shift it back again, it's
312, then again, it returns to itself.
The odd permutations
are those which involve just
a transposition of two elements, so 123,
if you switch 1 and 2,
you get 213, and so on.
So the Levi-Civita symbol is -1 in cases
like that, and then it's 0 otherwise,
meaning when, for example, two or
more of the indices, Are the same.
So in other words,
it vanishes unless every one of these,
every value of the index is present.
So now the end video quiz will ask
you to construct the vector cross
product using some of the tools
that we've just described.
So that example just showed you
how you can use the Einstein
convention Levi-Civita symbols and
the index system to
conveniently do standard
procedures of vector algebra,
which you'll find useful in
electromagnetism and mechanics.
And we'll make use of such examples
in further discussion here.
Now finally, there's a very important
contraction identity of this form, so,
All I can say is look at this carefully.
Here's the Einstein summation convention,
and you see there's what we call it
a contraction identity because there's
a duplication of two of the indices.
When that happens, it turns out
that you can reduce this product of
Levi-Civita symbols to the sum
of products of delta functions,
chronic or delta,
which has the following definition.
I think you're all familiar with that.
Delta ij is equal to 1 if i is equal to j,
and 0 otherwise.
And I think it would be,
it's probably a good idea for
you to pause.
And just look at this and
run a few examples to convince
yourself that it's true.
So just to put everything together,
with one example,
let's take something from
classical vector calculus.
A cross the quantity B cross C,
something that rises very
often in applications.
And so,
here we use the summation convention,
And the Levi-Civita.
And then, so here we have a second,
here we see this
pair of Levi-Civita symbols
come in the full expansion.
And basically, what we're doing here,
we're getting down to sort of
the most fundamental reduction of this
quantity in terms of its components.
So that's this.
And now we see that we can apply
the contraction identity thusly.
And we've end up.
I think you want to, good idea for
you to look at this and follow it through
offline that we get
the famous BAC-CAB rule,
which is often used for
resolving vector products.
Okay, this is very much a methodological
part of the lecture, so
hope you'll review what you've learned.
And then we're going to,
in the next few parts of the lectures,
start applying this to develop important
information about angular momentum.
Hope to see you again.